README.md, before:


# TravelTip

TravelTip is a lightweight location bookmarking app that combines the Google Maps JavaScript API with vanilla ES modules, browser storage, and modern Web APIs. Click anywhere on the map to capture the exact geo information, enrich it with a friendly name and rating, and keep your favorite spots only a tap away.

## Highlights
- Location CRM for travelers: add, edit, delete, and browse saved places with distance calculations and relative timestamps.
- Interactive Google map with reverse geocoding, pan-to-search, and persistent markers per selection.
- Built-in filtering, sorting, and donut-style stats for at-a-glance insights.
- Web Share, Clipboard, and Geolocation API integrations for frictionless sharing and navigation.
- Color theme picker, debug panel, and responsive layout ready for desktop and mobile.

## Tech Stack
- Vanilla JavaScript modules (no build step)
- Google Maps JavaScript API + Geocoding endpoint
- Browser APIs: LocalStorage, Geolocation, Clipboard, Web Share
- HTML5 `<dialog>` for CRUD forms and modern CSS for layout/theme

## Project Structure
```
travel-tip-starter/
├── index.html               # Root document with map, filters, dialog, and script entrypoint
├── css/
│   ├── main.css             # Global styles and layout helpers
│   └── base, cmps           # Design tokens and component styles
├── js/
│   ├── app.controller.js    # UI glue code, DOM/render logic, query param sync
│   └── services/
│       ├── loc.service.js   # CRUD, filtering, sorting, stats, demo seed data
│       ├── map.service.js   # Google Maps init, markers, reverse geocoding, user clicks
│       ├── async-storage.service.js # LocalStorage-based async facade
│       └── util.service.js  # Helpers: ids, timers, colors, query params, haversine
├── img/                     # Placeholder for future assets
└── README.md
```

## Getting Started
1. **Clone & install dependencies** (none required beyond a modern browser). Optionally install a static server for clean module imports:
   ```powershell
   npm install -g serve
   serve .
   ```
   Alternatively, open `index.html` via `Live Server` in VS Code.
2. **Configure a Google Maps API key**:
   - Create an API key with Maps JavaScript + Geocoding permissions.
   - Update the `API_KEY` constant in `js/services/map.service.js`.
3. **Load the app** in the browser (`http://localhost:3000` if using `serve`) and allow location access when prompted.

## Usage
1. Click anywhere on the map to open the dialog, name the spot, and set a rating.
2. Filter by text or minimum rating, and sort by name, rating, or creation time.
3. Select a location to view address details, drop a marker, copy the deep link, or share via the Web Share API.
4. Hit the "My position" button to center the map around your geolocation and get distance calculations per saved location.
5. Track collection health through the dual donut charts (by rating and last update window).

## Data Model
Each location persists to LocalStorage via `async-storage.service.js` with the following schema:
```js
{
  id: 'GEouN',
  name: 'Dahab, Egypt',
  rate: 5,
  geo: {
    address: 'Dahab, South Sinai, Egypt',
    lat: 28.5096676,
    lng: 34.5165187,
    zoom: 11
  },
  createdAt: 1706562160181,
  updatedAt: 1706562160181
}
```
Data is seeded with three demo entries on first load and can be filtered, sorted, and aggregated entirely client-side.

## Core Modules
- `locService`: CRUD, filter/sort state, and stats helpers (`getLocCountByRateMap`, `getLocCountByUpdateMap`).
- `mapService`: Google Maps bootstrap, reverse geocoding, marker management, and user click handlers.
- `utilService`: Shared utilities (ID generation, elapsed time formatting, query param syncing, color palette, distance calculation).
- `app.controller`: Renders lists/UI, wires DOM events to the services via the global `window.app` namespace, and surfaces user messaging.

## Customization Ideas
1. Swap LocalStorage for a real backend by replacing `async-storage.service.js` with fetch calls.
2. Extend the dialog with photos, tags, or visit notes and visualize them in the list.
3. Add pagination using the existing `PAGE_SIZE` constant inside `locService`.
4. Gate map interactions behind authentication if embedding into a larger dashboard.

## Troubleshooting
- **Map fails to load**: Confirm the API key is valid, referrer restrictions are correct, and billing is enabled for the Maps project.
- **Geolocation blocked**: The browser requires HTTPS (or localhost). Allow the permission prompt and retry the "My position" button.
- **Clipboard/Web Share errors**: Some desktop browsers restrict these APIs to HTTPS contexts; run via `Live Server` or a secure host.

Happy mapping! 🚀

Commit message:

feat(env): integrate dotenv for Google Maps API key management and update README

README.md, after:


# TravelTip

TravelTip is a lightweight location bookmarking app that combines the Google Maps JavaScript API with vanilla ES modules, browser storage, and modern Web APIs. Click anywhere on the map to capture the exact geo information, enrich it with a friendly name and rating, and keep your favorite spots only a tap away.

## Highlights
- Location CRM for travelers: add, edit, delete, and browse saved places with distance calculations and relative timestamps.
- Interactive Google map with reverse geocoding, pan-to-search, and persistent markers per selection.
- Built-in filtering, sorting, and donut-style stats for at-a-glance insights.
- Web Share, Clipboard, and Geolocation API integrations for frictionless sharing and navigation.
- Color theme picker, debug panel, and responsive layout ready for desktop and mobile.

## Tech Stack
- Vanilla JavaScript modules (no build step)
- Google Maps JavaScript API + Geocoding endpoint
- Browser APIs: LocalStorage, Geolocation, Clipboard, Web Share
- HTML5 `<dialog>` for CRUD forms and modern CSS for layout/theme

## Project Structure
```
travel-tip-starter/
├── index.html               # Root document with map, filters, dialog, and script entrypoint
├── css/
│   ├── main.css             # Global styles and layout helpers
│   └── base, cmps           # Design tokens and component styles
├── js/
│   ├── app.controller.js    # UI glue code, DOM/render logic, query param sync
│   └── services/
│       ├── loc.service.js   # CRUD, filtering, sorting, stats, demo seed data
│       ├── map.service.js   # Google Maps init, markers, reverse geocoding, user clicks
│       ├── async-storage.service.js # LocalStorage-based async facade
│       └── util.service.js  # Helpers: ids, timers, colors, query params, haversine
├── img/                     # Placeholder for future assets
└── README.md
```

## Getting Started
1. **Install dependencies** (dotenv powers the env injection script):
  ```powershell
  npm install
  ```
2. **Create your env file** from the template and set the Google Maps key:
  ```powershell
  copy .env.example .env
  # edit .env and set GOOGLE_MAPS_API_KEY
  ```
3. **Generate the runtime config** so the browser module can read the key without committing it:
  ```powershell
  npm run build:config
  ```
  This writes `js/config.js` (gitignored) with `envConfig.googleMapsApiKey`.
4. **Serve the app** using any static server (ES modules require HTTP). For example:
  ```powershell
  npx serve .
  ```
  Or launch via VS Code's Live Server extension.
5. **Load the app** in the browser (default `http://localhost:3000`) and allow location access when prompted.

## Usage
1. Click anywhere on the map to open the dialog, name the spot, and set a rating.
2. Filter by text or minimum rating, and sort by name, rating, or creation time.
3. Select a location to view address details, drop a marker, copy the deep link, or share via the Web Share API.
4. Hit the "My position" button to center the map around your geolocation and get distance calculations per saved location.
5. Track collection health through the dual donut charts (by rating and last update window).

## Data Model
Each location persists to LocalStorage via `async-storage.service.js` with the following schema:
```js
{
  id: 'GEouN',
  name: 'Dahab, Egypt',
  rate: 5,
  geo: {
    address: 'Dahab, South Sinai, Egypt',
    lat: 28.5096676,
    lng: 34.5165187,
    zoom: 11
  },
  createdAt: 1706562160181,
  updatedAt: 1706562160181
}
```
Data is seeded with three demo entries on first load and can be filtered, sorted, and aggregated entirely client-side.

## Core Modules
- `locService`: CRUD, filter/sort state, and stats helpers (`getLocCountByRateMap`, `getLocCountByUpdateMap`).
- `mapService`: Google Maps bootstrap, reverse geocoding, marker management, and user click handlers.
- `utilService`: Shared utilities (ID generation, elapsed time formatting, query param syncing, color palette, distance calculation).
- `app.controller`: Renders lists/UI, wires DOM events to the services via the global `window.app` namespace, and surfaces user messaging.

## Customization Ideas
1. Swap LocalStorage for a real backend by replacing `async-storage.service.js` with fetch calls.
2. Extend the dialog with photos, tags, or visit notes and visualize them in the list.
3. Add pagination using the existing `PAGE_SIZE` constant inside `locService`.
4. Gate map interactions behind authentication if embedding into a larger dashboard.

## Troubleshooting
- **Map fails to load**: Confirm the API key is valid, referrer restrictions are correct, and billing is enabled for the Maps project.
- **Geolocation blocked**: The browser requires HTTPS (or localhost). Allow the permission prompt and retry the "My position" button.
- **Clipboard/Web Share errors**: Some desktop browsers restrict these APIs to HTTPS contexts; run via `Live Server` or a secure host.

Happy mapping! 🚀
